[AUDIO LOGO]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> 180 miles
southeast of Ankara,
the capital city of Turkey, in
the Cappadocia region is one
of the most fascinating and
mysterious places on Earth.
In 1963, a local
villager knocked down
a wall in his house while doing
renovations to his basement.
And what he found
was a secret chamber.
Even more remarkable was that
this chamber had a tunnel
opening along one of the walls.
That tunnel turned out to lead
directly into the Derinkuyu
underground city, a
city lost to time,
finally came back to light.
The word "Derinkuyu"
means "deep well"
in Cappadocian Greek,
a local dialect.
Experts agree that
it's an incredibly
advanced and sophisticated
feat of engineering
that would be difficult
to reproduce even today.
Was this subterranean
world built by humans?
Or could its origins be
much older from the time
before the Great Deluge?
>> Derinkuyu-- this is a
remarkable underground complex.
It has about 18 levels of very
sophisticated stone-cut rooms
with corridors, with
big, circular stone
doors between certain
passages and areas.
And it is one of the most
remarkable constructions
that I've ever visited.
And what's really
interesting about this
is that they found Paleolithic
and Mesolithic tools
and sort of points
there, suggesting
it's extremely ancient.
>> From a geologic
perspective, the architecture
and the engineering of Derinkuyu
is unparalleled anywhere
in the world today
that we know of.
These underground
cities, some of them
as much as 300 feet deep,
holding as many as 20,000
people, are carved in place
through the volcanic ash
that compacted over a
long period of time.
This is called pyroclastic
material called tuff, T-U-F-F.
It is volcanic ash
that has fallen.
And as that ash
has fallen, it has
been compressed and compacted.
So it is lightweight,
and it's very porous.
It's easy to work.
But this is where the
architectural challenge
comes from because it
is also load-bearing.
So what this means is
as the architects were
building these massive
complexes and cathedrals
and living quarters and
cooking quarters and storage
quarters underneath this
particular site and all
of the others, the many
that connect to it,
they had to keep in mind
that the ceiling could not
be so vast, that it
would not support
the weight of the
overburden up on top.
And this means there
are many columns that
had to be left in
place as they were
going through and building.
And you ask, why would
people go through the trouble
to build such a
complex underground?
The way they built it,
I think, gives us a clue
because not only they
built it 300 feet deep,
but they built it so that the
stone doors could be closed
only from the inside as if
they were sealing themselves
to protect themselves
from something.
What would that something be?
We don't know today for certain.
My sense as a geologist
is it probably would not
be from a flood because
it's underwater,
even though Derinkuyu is
located at a little bit higher
elevation.
Perhaps a cosmic
event could have
been happening during the
time that this was built
or the anticipation
of a cosmic event.
>> I mean, you can't date rock,
which is a bit unfortunate.
All we know is that the
Phrygians were there.
But that's relatively
new culture.
The Greeks were hiding there.
All kinds of people
have been hiding there.
What is fascinating about
it is the amount of rooms
that this place has.
And there are chapels in there.
There are doors which act like
airlocks, so, clearly, keeping
something out, whether it
was people or water or even
cosmic outbursts.
>> Who is responsible for
the sophisticated engineering
at Derinkuyu?
Is it possible there
is more to the story
about who created this
architectural marvel
of the ancient world?
For starters,
alternative researchers
have noted intriguing
similarities
between this site and other
mysterious underground
complexes.
>> The most interesting part
about Derinkuyu is the fact
that the upper levels are
carved out almost like the same
quality as the Hypogeum in Malta
or the Domus de Janas tombs
in ancient Sardinia.
It's very sophisticated,
done with extremely advanced
technology.
There's even a tunnel
that stretches up
to five kilometers
between Derinkuyu
and another underground
city called Kaymakli.
So we're looking at very
advanced engineering
potentially from a
very, very early era.
>> One of the fascinating things
about Derinkuyu is the fact
that it is not an
isolated underground city.
Although it is 300
feet underground
and held over
20,000 or so people,
it is connected to over 200
additional cities located
many miles beyond
where this site is.
The interesting, really
interesting thing
is that many of the cities are
built with slightly different
architecture.
Some of the other cities, for
example, are not quite as deep,
or the passages are narrower.
And they have more
levels of the chambers,
very, very different than the
minimal number of chambers
that we see at Derinkuyu
with the massive rooms that
are there.
They were connected.
And it made it
possible for people
to live and to
commute and to have
commerce and trade for
extended periods of time
under the ground.
Why would a population
go through the trouble
to do this unless they feared
that something above the ground
level threatened their
existence, their survival,
or their way of life?
>> How is it possible that
humans with little advanced
technological tools at their
disposal created this network
of underground cities stretching
for miles in every direction?
Alternative researchers are
sure about one thing concerning
this small town south of
Cappadocia in the Nevsehir
province of Turkey.
There is an important
story to tell here
about our long-lost past.
They believe that what
happened here may not
be what mainstream
archaeologists have
been insisting on for
the last 60 years.
Mainstream archaeologists
have two competing theories
about the age of this
breathtaking site.
The first considers
that this city
may have been constructed
by the Hittite people
around 3,300 years ago to
help them withstand attacks
from various enemies.
Another equally
common idea supposes
that this place was
constructed by the Phrygians
500 years later in the eighth
century before Common Era.
This theory assumes
that the Phrygians, who
were known to be very
sophisticated architects
and builders during the Iron
Age, built this hideaway.
But is there an
alternative possibility?
Could it be the age of this site
goes back thousands of years
before mainstream
archaeologists insist to a time
before the Great Flooding
of the Younger Dryas period?
>> Derinkuyu is the largest
and the best explored
of the underground cities in
the central area of Turkey known
as Cappadocia.
And there are underground
cities and dozens
of other much smaller
complexes, most of which
have never, ever been explored.
But what's also
important about Derinkuyu
is that there's
evidence that it could
be as much as 12,000 years old.
And this knowledge
comes from the work
of an archaeologist, who was
also the curator of Derinkuyu,
whose name was Omer Demir.
I went to Turkey,
and I found him.
And I said, tell
me what evidence
it was that convinced
you that Derinkuyu could
be 12,000 years old and
was actually constructed
by so-called
Paleolithic peoples.
And he took me down
to the first level.
And he showed me the
walls, and he said, look,
these have been cut
using stone tools.
He took me down into the next
level, and it was much cruder.
He says, look here.
These have been cut
using metal tools, which
shows that this
must have happened
during or after the Bronze Age.
And then he gave me the
key piece of evidence.
On a riverbank, just a
few miles away, what he
found was Paleolithic stone
tools amongst the spoil.
And this was the key
piece of evidence
that told him that these
structures must date back
at least 12,000 years.
So what's happened, of course,
is that much later cultures
have found this original
underground complex
and then dug down even further
to make more and more levels,
more and more floors until
you get the city that's there
today.
>> What's really amazing, there
are ventilation shafts leading
from the deepest levels, all the
way to the top level and even
places in there for worship
and even for livestock.
So people can go down
there and live down there
for literally years at a time.
And what's interesting is
these ventilation shafts were
so fine and so very
small, it would
have to have been some
type of advanced technology
to create these shafts
through this tunnel.
Another thing that's
interesting is
there is no evidence
of any collapse.
So what that tells
us is the people
were very well-aware of
how to work this material,
how to excavate it.
And it takes a lot
of foreplanning
knowing how to create a
structure that goes that deep
that can house and
hold that much weight
and that many people
without collapse.
So it begs to ask the
question, could this
have been built by an advanced
civilization millennia
ago, long before anybody
else stumbled across it?
It seems to me that
it may have been
built by advanced beings
that are not of this world.
>> If Derinkuyu is at
least 12,000 years old,
could there be more to the
prediluvian story of why it was
built in the first place?
Alternative researchers
understand not far
from the Derinkuyu complex
is one of the most intriguing
early temple sites in
the world, Gobekli Tepe,
a site that has evidence
showing that it was carefully
buried nearly 12,000 years ago.
If Derinkuyu is, in fact,
much older than archaeologists
claim, is it possible there is
a connection between this site
and Gobekli Tepe?
>> One of the unsolved mysteries
of Gobekli Tepe is the fact
that each of these circular
temples are intentionally
buried in the hillside
where they are found,
and that that burial happened
during a time when there were
great cataclysms that were
happening on the Earth.
The mystery is, were they buried
to preserve what had been left
or would have been created
for future generations?
When we look at the Younger
Dryas and we look at the time
that the ice was
melting, the deluge
occurred, if these sites
were covered to protect them
during the time of the
deluge or during the time
of the catastrophes
following the Dryas, what
it says to us is
that they existed
before those things happen.
So, once again, we're
faced with the question,
were these sites,
like Gobekli Tepe--
were they built
during the Ice Age,
perhaps during a warming
period within the Pleistocene
while the Ice Age
officially was still intact?
>> My observation of Gobekli
Tepe is that it was beautifully
encased as though people were
protecting it from something.
It was lovingly protected with
an overlapping wall of stones
and then slowly filled
in with material
but that in such
a delicate matter
as though they're
expecting something
is coming out of the
sky, or something
is going to destroy it.
And it's as though
they're expecting
it to come back sometime
after the event and dig it up,
and Gobekli Tepe is still
in perfect condition.
So I just put one
and one together.
I figured I wonder
if it was something
to do with the Great Flood.
So 9703 BC is the average
archaeological and also
geological date for
the Great Flood.
And I reasoned
that if they buried
Gobekli Tepe as a
means of preserving it
for some future
date, they were then
found themselves protection
inside a cave system
for a considerable
period of time,
which really links into
the cave systems in Turkey.
Why the cave system is
so beautifully designed
to prevent water from coming in?
I mean, it's beautiful.
I mean, you have these massive
rolling stones almost out
of the "Indiana
Jones," which you
can move the stones
from cave to cave,
and they will literally
form a watertight seal.
That suggests to me that
people were well-prepared.
They're well
forewarned in an event.
And then after the
event has subsided
and things are getting back to
normal, that people come out
of the cave, and they
expected to go back
to their everyday lives.
That makes a lot
of sense as to why
Gobekli Tepe would have been
carefully preserved, packaged.
And then people would've
expected to go back,
dig the whole thing up.
And it would have been
active just as it was before.
>> It's one of the ideas about
Derinkuyu and these multiple
underground cities that we find
in ancient Anatolia is the fact
that they were protecting
people from cometary debris.
They were potentially
protecting people from invaders.
And the fact that we're
finding Paleolithic
and Mesolithic
activity here suggest
they could have even been built
around the time of Gobekli
Tepe, which is nearly 12,000
years old, even older possibly.
And we know that Gobekli
Tepe was deliberately
covered up and protected.
So perhaps the people there
moved to Derinkuyu area
to actually hide from the
cometary debris, which
may have been occurring during
the Younger Dryas impact event.
>> Was there a supernova?
Were there solar flares, a
Coronal Mass Ejection, a CME,
during this time that
have happened many times
throughout history, creating
magnetic disturbances
in the sky that
would certainly have
been frightening to
an ancient people?
Or could there be
something else?
Is it possible
that either seeing
this and the fear
of what it meant
or seeing this and
seeing the changes
in the skies around them
with the magnetic changes
and the shifts that we're
seeing in the atmosphere
during the time that this
happened-- would that
be a reason for people to
want to live underground
for prolonged periods of time?
>> Is it possible one of the
last secrets to unlocking
the real history of Derinkuyu
is related to the Younger Dryas?
Could the debris from
an exploding planet
Tiamat described
in the Enuma Elish
been raining from the sky?
What was happening
in our ancient skies?
And was that connected
to the Great Deluge?
>> So it's very possible
that the Derinkuyu site,
if it were older than it is
traditionally accepted today
and if it were built to protect
an entire population from
something that they saw
threatening their lives
and their survival for
long periods of time,
that it could have been built
to protect them from massive
amounts of water coming from the
rains in the unsettled period
at the end of the Ice Age
for 4,000 years past that.
So when the ice began to melt
and the waters were rising,
Turkey is high enough
above sea level
that they would not have been
inundated through the rising
water.
But they certainly
would have been
subject to what is
called transient rains
or the unsettled
weather patterns that
happened for 4,000 years
after the melting of the ice.
So it is possible
that these sites
could have been built by
people who saw these changes,
were frightened by
the changes, knew
that life on the
surface of planet Earth
could not be business as usual,
and opted to quickly build
these tunnels
underground as they
could through the soft volcanic
ash in the way that they do.
>> For modern engineering, it is
very hard to build a city like
Derinkuyu because
of the type of rock,
too soft for supporting a very
complex structure spread over
85 meters in the underground.
But what was its origin?
And why was it built?
I believe the city was built by
an unknown civilization having
high level of knowledge.
And it was one of
the places where
the survivors of
the great cataclysm
lived before to
come back to surface
because only an advanced
society, having technologies
and high level of
geological knowledge,
could build Derinkuyu.
Therefore, if we can
assume that the city was
used during the modern time
by Phrygians or Hittites
but we must also agree
that they were not
able to build such a
kind of massive city,
then, in my opinion, was
built in a very distant past.
>> If the real timeline goes
back at least 12,000 years
at Derinkuyu,
possibly even older,
who were the actual builders
of this sophisticated village
enterprise?
Is it possible these underground
cities were originally
built for some kind
of advanced race
with sophisticated
engineering knowledge?
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> It reminds me of a legend
that's not very well-known,
but that is part of
the Book of the Giants,
where the question actually
is about them having cities
for the Nephilim.
So for these famous
awakening angels
who made it with humans,
what is interesting to stress
is that the Book of
the Giants indicates
that, in fact, the
gods would have
reproduced for the Nephilim.
Thus, these famous angels
would have mixed with humans
and would have spread
the civilization.
So the gods would have built
cities precisely underground.
So it matches
exactly what happens,
what we can discover and
see and even visit today
on the plateau of Cappadocia.
>> Derinkuyu in Cappadocia
has got to be one of the most
mysterious places on the planet.
Why do you live underground?
Well, the proposed
answer is that they're
escaping a catastrophe.
But we also know that
underground caverns and temples
were viewed as
places of connection
to other dimensional
beings, that caves
and underground temples were
places where humans could
go to be closer to the gods.
And it makes me wonder
if perhaps there's
a connection there
as well at Derinkuyu,
that what if, in fact, it
was built long before we're
told historically that
it was already in place,
and it was there that humans
would go to meet with the gods?
>> If this is true, does this
connection to the gods in these
sophisticated cave systems
suggest an otherworldly
connection to its builders?
>> The way we would see this is
it looks like back in ancient
times, deep antiquity, there
were some beings that came
here.
And these beings utilized
the underground areas
to live, to work, and, for
whatever reason, to hide.
When you look at some
of the ancient texts,
it seems like there were a lot
of battles and wars going on,
battles of the gods.
What better place to hide
than underneath the ground?
>> The idea that people lived
underground is something that
has a long history
in ancient cultures.
For example, in the
Vedic tradition of India,
there's the idea of
subterranean planets,
that there may be
creatures living
below the surface of the Earth.
In the ancient
Vedic texts, they're
described as
serpent-like, reptilian.
They had the ability
to change shape.
And sometimes they would emerge.
So that idea of underground
places where people would exist
has been present in a lot
of different cultures.
>> Underground cities were
built before Atlantian times.
It was built by
other civilizations
that came before trying to
survive during the Ice Age.
So they created all
these places to keep
themselves safe from whatever
was happening in the surface.
So in all the
region of Anatolia,
there was the head of the snake.
Everyone knew that there
would start all the paths, all
the knowledge.
So they would carve
all this territory
underground and from their
path to all over the world
because from there, the
knowledge would be spread.
So that's why in this
land, all the people that
came from the stars created all
these tunnels around this area
to keep the knowledge
in the underground.
>> It's a fascinating
proposition that
the underground chambers here
go back beyond 12,000 years ago,
possibly built by otherworldly
beings to survive here on Earth
and then used for many years
after as a place to hide during
cataclysm or connect with
the gods that left it
for the humans to discover.
Eventually, the
advanced race that
built this incredible
structure vanished.
But they left behind
these highly engineered
underground systems.
And they left behind a timeline
of events that pushes back
the mainstream understanding
of ancient civilizations
on this planet.
It is here, evidence of
different groups of humans
have left marks on the
walls and the tunnels,
groups of humans
that otherwise would
have perished in the conditions
of the Earth 12,000 years ago.
>> People don't go underground
unless they're hiding from
something, and they wish to
be protected by something.
And the only other
comparative thing
I can find in history
that is anywhere
close to this thing in
Turkey is the Hopi tradition,
when they talked about one of
the overturnings of the Earth,
which seemed to suggest
that time about 10,800
BC when the Earth was hit
by something rather big.
And it appears to have gone
completely the wrong way
around.
And people had to hide in
caves for a considerable amount
of time in order to
protect themselves
and then to come out
and start to get back
to their ordinary lives.
So I find the parallel
rather interesting
that they also built an
enormous cave system in Turkey
for ostensibly the same
reasons-- to protect themselves
from something else
that was coming out
of the sky that may have started
as an ecological disaster.
And in later years,
because, obviously,
the place has been reused
again and again and again
by different people, it
would have been really used
as a place for getting
away from people
who are trying to kill you.
>> The Derinkuyu cave system is
the most sophisticated that has
been uncovered in the
Anatolia region so far.
Its many levels
represent a timeline
of humanity overlooked by many.
But it is here that we see
the trials and tribulations
of ancient ancestors.
Ancient texts
reveal that the gods
built these caves to
live and to connect
with the Earth's secrets.
Evidence that they
were built much earlier
and then discovered by humans
roughly 12,000 years ago when
Gobekli Tepe was carefully
buried and preserved
has alternative
historians convinced
there is more to
the story than just
a well-done human endeavor.
Perhaps we can
think about the term
"deep well" as describing not
just a series of man-dug holes
in the ground for safety but,
rather, a sophisticated system
built by an unknown
group of architects
that provided knowledge
and understanding of what
was happening on the surface
thousands of years ago.
As humanity has endured
the hero's journey,
does this elaborate
cave system point
to a time on the road
of trials and tests?
Or was this a gift
from the gods that
helped keep our ancestors alive
during the end of the world?